Component Architecture Documentation (#38)
base-org/pessimism: specs/ETL.md

# ETL

> The Pessimism ETL is a generalized abstraction for a DAG based component system that continuously reads live chain data into inputs designed for consumption by the Risk Engine in the form of intertwined “pipelines”.

Reviewer: On "live" chain data: technically, it need not be live, yeah?
```suggestion
The Pessimism ETL is a generalized abstraction for a DAG-based component system that continuously transforms chain data into inputs for consumption by the Risk Engine in the form of intertwined “pipelines”.
```

## Component

> A component is an abstract representation of a graph node within the ETL system. Every component performs some operation for transiting data from some arbitrary data source to a consumable input for the Risk Engine to ingest. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A component refers to a graph node within the ETL system. Every component performs some operation for transforming data from any data source into a consumable input for the Risk Engine to ingest. 
```

Currently, there are three total component types:

> 1. `Pipe` - Used to perform local arbitrary computations _(e.g, Extracting L1Withdrawal transactions from a block)_
> 2. `Oracle` - Used to poll and collect data from some counter-party source _(e.g, Querying real-time account balance amounts)_
> 3. `Aggregator` - Used to synchronize events between asynchronous data sources _(e.g, Synchronizing L1/L2 blocks to understand real-time changes in bridging TVL)_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. `Pipe` - Used to perform local arbitrary computations _(e.g. Extracting L1Withdrawal transactions from a block)_
2. `Oracle` - Used to poll and collect data from some counter-party source _(e.g. Querying real-time account balance amounts)_
3. `Aggregator` - Used to synchronize events between asynchronous data sources _(e.g. Synchronizing L1/L2 blocks to understand real-time changes in bridging TVL)_
```

    
    subgraph B["Component1"]
        C -->  D[ingressHandler];
        D --> |dataX| E(eventLoop);
        E --> |dataY| F[egressHandler];
        F --> |dataY| G[egress0];
        F --> |dataY| H[egress1];
    end

    G --> K((Component2));
    H --> J((Component3));

```

#### Egress Handler
All component types use an `egressHandler` type for routing transit data to actively subscribed downstream ETL components.
```mermaid
flowchart TD;
    Component-->|Transit_Data|A[Egress0];
    Component-->|Transit_Data|B[Egress1];
```

#### Ingress Handler
All component types also use an `ingressHandler` type for ingesting active transit data from upstream ETL components.

### UUID
All components have a UUID that stores critical identification data. Component IDs are used by higher order abstractions to:
* Represent a component DAG 
* Understand when component duplicates occur in the system

Component UUID's constitute of both a randomly generated `UUID` and a deterministic `PID`. This is done to ensure uniqueness of each component instance while also ensuring collision based properties so that components can be reused when viable.

### Activity State Channel

> All component's have an internal activity state to represent their current status of operation. Currently, the only supported values are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All components have an internal activity state to represent their current status of operation. Currently, the only supported values are:
```

I. _Inactive_ - Refers to a component with no actively running event loop routine.
II. _Live_ - Refers to a component with an actively running event loop routine.
III. _Crashed_ - Refers to a component that's suffered some failure and subsequent `eventLoop` routine death. 

> **NOTE - State handling policies by managament abstractions has yet to be properly fleshed out**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**NOTE - State handling policies by management abstractions has yet to be properly fleshed out**
```

### Pipe
Pipes are used to perform local arbitrary computations on some input data. Once input data processing has been completed, the output data is then submitted to its respective destination(s). 

#### Attributes
* An `ActivityState` channel with a pipeline manager
* Ingress handler that other components can write to
* `TransformFunc` - A processing function that performs some data translation/transformation on respective inputs

> * An egressHandler that stores dependencies to write to (i,e. Other pipeline components, invariant engine)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* An `egressHandler` that stores dependencies to write to (i.e. Other pipeline components, invariant engine)
```

* A specified output data type

### Oracle 

> Oracles are responsible for collecting data from some external third party _(e.g, L1 geth node, L2 rollup node, etc.)_. As of now, oracle's are configurable through the use of a standard `OracleDefinition` interface that allows developers to write arbitrary oracle logic. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Oracles are responsible for collecting data from some external third party _(e.g. L1 geth node, L2 rollup node, etc.)_. As of now, oracle's are configurable through the use of a standard `OracleDefinition` interface that allows developers to write arbitrary oracle logic. 
```

The following key interface functions are supported/enforced:
* `ReadRoutine` - Routine used for reading/polling real-time data for some arbitrarily configured data source
* `BackTestRoutine` - _Optional_ routine used for sequentially backtesting from some starting to ending block heights. 

> Unlike other components, Oracle's actually employ _2 go routines_ to safely operate. This is because the definition routines are ran as a seperate go routine with a communication channel to the actual Oracle event loop. This is visualized below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike other components, `Oracles` actually employ _2 go routines_ to safely operate. This is because the definition routines are run as a separate go routine with a communication channel to the actual `Oracle` event loop. This is visualized below:
```

```mermaid
graph LR;
    subgraph A[Oracle]
        B[eventLoop]-->|channel|ODefRoutine;
         B[eventLoop]-->|context|ODefRoutine;
        B-->B;
    end

```

#### Attributes
* A communication channel with the pipeline manager
* Poller/subscription logic that performs real-time data reads on some third-party source

> * An egressHandler that stores dependencies to write to (i,e. Other pipeline components, invariant engine)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* An `egressHandler` that stores dependencies to write to (i.e. Other pipeline components, invariant engine)
```
